What's around the planet
Mercury? Well, Mercury is a very
difficult object to observe. In fact,
because it's orbiting so close to the
sun, it tends to stick close to the sun
in the sky and is always therefore in
the twilight either just after sunset or
just before
dawn. You can catch it with a telescope.
And the very poor image on the right
hand side is my best
attempt. A small pinkish disc showing a
little bit of phase if you really use
your imagination on that image. Other
people have taken much better
photographs. Uh we'll see some more
close-ups later on. Um but I'm not alone
in finding it difficult. The great
astronomer Capernacus who proposed that
the planets all orbited around the sun
in his book the revolution desorbium
celestium never managed to see Mercury
at all in his entire
life. Now I said it orbits close to the
sun. It really does. It only takes 88
days to go round at a distance of 57
million kilometers. That's 0.4 4 of an
astronomical unit, the Earth's sun
distance. So the Earth is 2 and a half
times as far
away. Now when you look at it close up,
this is a photograph taken by a space
probe. What you see is a gray and crater
covered surface. Looks very similar to
parts of the moon, but there are none of
those dark mar the uh seas of the moon
visible on here. So you can tell the
difference when shown the whole disc
although perhaps this looks much more
like the far side of the moon which also
doesn't have those mar but what this
means this crater
accumulation takes time and if there is
no process going on to erase the craters
no erosion or continents being subducted
underneath other continents or anything
then they just accumulate and So
flipping the argument round, when you
see a lot of craters on a piece of
terrain, it is a long time since it's
been resurfaced and it's therefore old.
So this looks like not a huge amount has
happened on Mercury for a very long
time. It's a small planet. When we
compare it to the sun, the radius is
only
38%. Just over a third of the diameter,
which would mean that if you took a
third time a third time a third, you'd
get a 27th of the
volume. But with a 27th of the volume,
you might expect to get a 27th of the
mass perhaps. But actually, the mass is
a little bit more than that. at 5 1/2%
that of the Earth. A 20th would be um
4%, wouldn't it? So, a 27th would be
less than
that. And actually, it's really quite a
dense planet. 5.4 g per cubic cm is
nearly as dense as the Earth, which is
actually uh 5.5.
So that's quite surprising really
because some of the other planets are
rather less
dense and it spins very very slowly.
When I first read about Mercury in Sir
Patrick Moore's books of the 1960s, it
talked of it being tidily locked so that
it kept one face always pointing to the
sun as the moon does with the Earth.
And that would mean rotating on its axis
in 88 days, the period that we knew it
took to go round. But that wasn't the
right answer. And and once spacecraft
were able to measure it most accurately,
the correct period is 58 days, 15 hours,
and 30 minutes. So, uh, considerably
shorter. Now, a clue to its structure is
that it has a magnetic field. um quite a
surprise because small planets such as
Mars really don't have much of a
magnetic field but Mercury certainly
does. So uh we were able to detect that
and what it's pointing at is that there
is a very large metal core and only a
very thin crust. So the core is a very
substantial piece of mercury containing
nickel and iron
metals as opposed to the much lighter
silicate rocks of the mantle and crust.
And that's the reason that's why we how
we account for it being so much more
dense perhaps than expected compared to
a fairly modest planet like Mars which
has a much more
modest iron
core. Now there's a false color
photograph here of a region on the side
of Mercury here where something
happened. There's a massive impact basin
nearly 1,500 kilometers across thousand
miles.
And this is a huge ringed basin where a
space rock smashed into
Mercury. And if you look at the far side
of Mercury, you can even find little
fractures in the surface which are
indications that the shock wave from the
impact went right through. And we think
that this actually is responsible for
the fact that it has a relatively thin
crust. We think what happened was that
it was struck by a a giant impactor
creating this caloris basin, but that
that ripped away a huge amount of the
outer surface of Mercury and the iron
cores of the two objects merged
together.
This is the same sort of process that we
think happened at the earth when the
hypothetical planet the crashed into
earth. The iron cores merged and a lot
of ejector was thrown up into the near
earth
space and that that condensed into rings
and perhaps even formed the moon and a
lot of the rings then gradually uh
decayed and uh rained out onto the
planet. But in this case, the impact
perhaps was more headon than it was uh a
glancing blow. The ejector went higher
and because of the smaller overall
gravity of the material, there was much
less overall stuff involved here, just
over five and a half, maybe a bit more
in total before some of the ejector
left. the escape velocity would have
been considerably lower and also the
gravity of the nearby sun would have
been felt much more strongly and so
rather than forming a moon of Mercury
the material was de-orbited down into
the sun and destroyed
there. Now talking of orbits I told you
that uh the orbit took 88 days and the
rotation period took 58 days. This is
actually a 3:2 ratio. It's most
peculiar. Rather than being tidily
locked so that the rotation period
equals the orbital
period, you get one and a half rotations
of the planet for each orbit. So if it
started with you as the little red line
at position one at the top of the
diagram there, a third of an orbit
later, you you would have be at location
two, but you would have done half a
turn. So you you would be facing
downwards instead of upwards on this
diagram. Another third of a orbit later,
you'd be at position three, having done
another half turn, and you'd be facing
back upwards. So you would have returned
to your original facing direction, but
the planet will have only done 2/3 of an
orbit. Another third of an orbit later,
it gets back to where it started. 3/3 of
the orbit takes you back from position
one to position four, but you've done
your one and a half complete turns. And
so this time you're facing the sun. And
so it goes on. Another third of an orbit
down to five. And you've changed
direction again. and over to six and you
change direction again and then from six
you end up back at one in the original
situation having restored your position
and your facing
direction. So this is a meta stable a
quai stable situation. It's not the
lowest energy configuration that would
be for the planet to have become tidily
locked but it's essentially a local
minimum of the possible energy states.
So, Mercury is slightly trapped in this
rather curious and unusual situation.
And I think we should be careful about
guessing that many exoplanets are tidily
locked because that's the lowest energy
state and it would seem likely because
it hasn't happened here. Um, we've
already got one example of where it
could have happened but did
not. Now, the other really weird thing
about the orbit is the fact that the
long axis of the relatively elliptical
curve that Mercury traces out around the
sun
precesses. It seems to swing around. It
never quite repeats the same orbit
twice. And this is in the main down to
the influence of the gravity of the
other planets. Venus, Earth, and Jupiter
account for most of the effect. Venus
because it's nearby, Earth because,
well, it's also fairly nearby, but a bit
further. Uh, and Jupiter further still,
but a very massive object. So, all of
the planets affect the orbits of all of
the others, but these are the main
effects that are causing Mercury to
swing around.
And that brings us to this chap Urbane
Leier, director of the observatory in
Paris back in the uh
1800s. He used Newton's laws from 200
years earlier to
calculate the expected orbits of the
planets and allowed for all of those
planetary
interactions. In particular, he
calculated the orbits for the inner
planets to great precision and he was
able to show that there were potential
issues that although they appeared
stable, they might not be in the very
long term. Um and that is something that
we know today because eventually the
interactions of the planets are slightly
chaotic and so um in a billion years
time things might have changed.
[Music]
But what he did do was use a whole
series of observations of the planet
Mercury and its orbit, 200 of them, and
calculated the best possible fit between
the orbits of the planets and the mass
estimates and tried to get a sort of
minimized
solution and then make some predictions.
And one of them was that he predicted
that Mercury would transit in front of
the dis of the sun on the 8th of May
1845.
Now, just briefly, a transit is where a
planet goes between the Earth and the
Sun creating a kind of miniature
eclipse. Uh, if it was the moon doing
this, we would call it an eclipse. But
if it's Mercury or Venus or an inner
planet, then it's called a transit. And
here's a rather nice photograph taken
with a hydrogen alpha telescope of the
sun. And you can see some boiling away
on the surface there. A sunspot at the
top left. There's a solar prominence
erupting bottom left and in the lower
middle right section you see the small
black disc of Mercury moving across in
front of the sun. So you can easily tell
the difference with a nice photograph
like this between a sunspot and a
planet. They do look rather different.
So the 1845 transit, he submitted his
predictions to the Cincinnati
Observatory and I visited there a few
years ago, took these photographs.
There's a lovely old observatory
building there with a couple of
instruments in it and behind me the much
more modern recent building which was
the center of time for the USA. And so
it was a superb place to choose because
this had very accurate clocks and could
time Levier's prediction with extreme
precision. The planet Julie appeared.
Thankfully, it was a nice clear day and
the time noted on the uh timekeeping
apparatus, but it was 16 seconds late.
Now 16 seconds doesn't sound very like
very much but Leier's predictions were
to the half a second level. So this was
quite a big
error. And Leier was shocked when he got
the results. It just did not seem likely
unless he'd made a mathematical mistake
in all of his hand calculations. And so
he pulled his uh manuscript from
publication and went away to think about
things. Um and uh he did use this
prediction in a very interesting way.
He'd been involved in the discovery of
Neptune using mathematics and based on
that idea he predicted a new planet, the
planet Vulcan. And I have a talk called
Once Around the Planet Vulcan which goes
into all the gory details of that if
you're interested. So I won't repeat
them all here. But uh thanks very much
for listening to me talking about the
planet Mercury, its characteristics and
orbit.